Hello, my delicious
co-creators.
Lilou here.
I'm in Glasgow today
in Scotland with David.
Hello David.
Hello, Lilou, and
how are you today?
Very good.
I love your accent.
Yes, Scottish
through and through.
I grew up in this area.
I studied in Glasgow.
I went to university
here, my degree and PhD,
both about-- in fact
about three minutes
walk from where we're
sitting right now.
Yeah.
And this is kind of a dream
come true for you, unexpected,
your life went in an
unexpected way, not
really the way that you who had
studied, but this is quite big.
Tomorrow you are speaking
in the big auditorium
here on the river?
-Yeah.
I'm speaking at the Scottish
Exhibition Conference Center.
And it's the biggest self-help
conference ever in Scotland.
And it's all Hay House authors,
So it's Hay House, I can do it.
And I'm so excited.
Because I visualized
this about 10 years ago.
12 years ago actually, I did
my very first public event.
I had resigned from-- I
used to be a scientist
in the pharmaceutical industry.
I had resigned and did my
very, very first event.
And there was only
13 people at it.
I was all filled with big ideas.
I thought, I'm leaving my job.
I'm speaking for lots
and lots of people.
And there's was 13.
Nine of them were
family and friends.
And three of them came because
I met them in a cafe the week
before.
And they only came if
they didn't have to pay.
So only one--
-It was free.
I love it.
So only one person
really paid, really came.
And afterwards, I
thought, I'm not
very good at this organizing
pf the event situation
because it's cost
me a lot of money.
And I was feeling
a bit dejected.
And I thought, the
workshop went really well.
And in that moment, I
was saying, damn it,
I'm going to make this work.
I immediately visualized
myself speaking
alongside Wayne Dyer and
Louise Hay and a few others.
And I decided it was going
to be at the Scottish
Exhibition Conference
or the Clyde Auditorium
as it's known as.
And I decided.
I didn't set a time on it.
I just said, that's
what I was going to do.
And this image
popped into my mind
at the time of Wayne Dyer
speaking and finishing
and I came on right after Wayne
and I got a big high five.
And it's funny because tomorrow,
I'm right after Wayne Dyer.
So I'll see if the
high five happens.
At least I visualized
it 12 years ago.
It's a big achievement
to have-- well,
to me the most amazing
thing about your whole story
is that you were working for
the pharmaceutical industry.
You were well paid.
You had everything.
It's all set.
But one day you decided to
resign because it no longer fit
with your perception of things.
No, yeah, I did
my PhD in a field
called organic chemistry, which
basically you build molecules.
You stick atoms together.
And in the pharmaceutical
industry where I ended up
after my PhD, I was building
and developing drugs
for heart disease and cancer.
But I started to notice,
when we tested the drugs,
you give 100 people a drug
and 100 people the fake drug,
a placebo, which
is made of sugar,
blackboard chalk,
these type of things.
There's nothing in it really.
But incredibly, loads and
loads of people get better.
And sometimes almost as many
on the placebo as people
actually on the drug.
And I thought, wow, what
on earth is going on here?
So in my spare time I started
to research what happens
when you have a thought?
I think we grow up,
certainly in the West,
we grow up with this idea
that you have a thought
and it just disappears.
It's a floaty thing that
has no power whatsoever.
And I thought, no
that's not correct.
Because when you have a
thought, you start to change
the chemistry of your brain.
And if you think the same
thought over and over again,
you begin to shape the
actual physical structure
of the brain.
And the placebo effect
works in the sense
that when you believe something
or expect a drug to work,
even if it's a placebo,
you change brain chemistry
and you also impact on some
of the physiological processes
inside the body.
And I thought,
this is incredible.
People must know about this.
So even though I was
in a well paid job,
I completely lost
interest in making
drugs, no interest at all.
Because I couldn't-- it
was so interesting for me,
the power of the mind.
I couldn't let it go.
So I just decided to resign.
I resigned to start writing
books and giving public talks.
You self-published
your first book.
I did.
I didn't mean to self-publish.
I contacted every main
publisher in the UK
and they didn't really
go for it at the time.
And I thought,
well, I'm determined
to write a book so I'm
just going to do it anyway.
And this was back in 2005.
So I just self-published.
But then Hay House picked it
up really quickly after that.
And my other six books are
with Hey House as well.
And your latest one came
out in October, 2012.
Yep.
It's called "Is Your
Life Mapped Out?"
And the subtitle is
"Unraveling the Mystery
of Destiny versus Free Will."
So we're going to
also speak about that.
But first I would love
to see how you started.
So you quit that job.
You starting writing this book
and what kind of evidence--
because you really bridge
science with spirituality.
How did you-- what
had happened there?
What kind of research
have you done and papers
you put together
or facts that are
really mind boggling that
you can present to us today?
Well, the first thing
I started researching
was placebo effect and studying
what happens in the brain
chemically.
And how does a placebo
effect occur inside the body?
And that naturally led me
into all the different ways
that mind impacted the body.
So I ended up
researching meditation.
And I don't publish
any of my own research
because there's
so much out there.
So I find myself taking
the complex stuff
that's out there that most
people don't understand.
Because you take a scientific
paper, publication,
it's full of jargon.
Even just looking at the
abstract, the summary,
it's still full of jargon.
So I started to take--
most of my books
have 200 to 300 references.
And I compile all that
and compact it down.
And my thing, if
you care to call it,
my thing is explaining stuff.
So what I do is I take the
complex stuff and I package it
in a simple way that my mom
and dad and my Auntie Jean
can read.
-And my kid.
Yeah, and kids can read
and understand and think,
yeah, that's really easy.
So when I first
started doing this,
it was placebo effect,
then meditation.
And there was so much stuff
on how meditation can impact
the heart and how meditation
could structurally
impact to the brain.
I mean, you listen to the
sound of your breathing
and you impact
several brain regions.
And if you practice
over and over again,
you actually shape the
physical structure of the brain
and the top of the brain
here, the prefrontal cortex.
You actually physically
shape the structure.
Neuroplasticity?
Neuroplasticity, yeah, yeah.
And even visualizing
itself, not just meditating
on the sound of your breath, but
visualizing something happening
in your life, you
also physically shape
the structure of the brain.
And through neuroplasticity,
the brain can even be
thought of as akin to a muscle.
If you exercise a muscle, it
gets stronger and develops.
So if you visualize something
or imagine the same thing
over and over again,
the brain also
begins to change like a muscle.
And in many ways, some
of the things I realized
is the brain can't distinguish
between whether something's
actually happening or whether
you're just imagining it.
And that's great.
Because if you're imagining
healing or changing your life,
then in many ways, once
you've done it's a memory.
It's already happened
for your brain.
And the skill then is
to get out of the way.
And what I mean by
getting out of the way,
stop believing that
you can't for example.
Yeah, that's a big one.
That's a big, big one.
I really enjoyed
this conversation,
because it shows us that
really anything is possible.
And then we wonder why this
information is not out anymore.
Were you stopped at
any time of the way
by other pharmaceutical
business?
I mean how did they react
so when you stopped?
Well for me, I found it
relatively easy because what
I do is I back up
everything I say
and everything I write
about with solid science.
And I don't really try
to make any enemies.
I'm not out there telling
people, you can use your mind.
If a person's got cancer,
I'm not saying use your mind
and forget medical advice.
I say do both.
Take medical advice but
use your mind as well.
Not instead of, but as well as.
In the past, we wouldn't
use the mind at all.
So by going through
this mechanism,
I guess, and I'm asking people
to live their life in the way
they would normally live it.
Take the advice they
can ordinarily take,
but here is the power of
the mind as well as that,
and then we start to develop
this feeling inside ourselves,
this faith in
ourselves that we have
far more than we think we are.
And who knows where that
will actually lead to
in terms of our capabilities.
But I think at the moment,
what I've purposely
tried to do is straddle, make
a bridge into the mainstream
because I think
most people who have
this interest in the
power of the mind
and spirituality, it's
a group of people.
It's a certain
market, if you like,
in terms of book publishing.
There's an area
people are interested.
And all these other
people in the world
could really benefit
from this knowledge,
but they don't know about it.
So what I find is happening
as I'm bridging this gap
with science, is many people
in the mainstream are thinking,
whoa, I totally did not
know that, and finding they
can really use that
in their lives.
So that's the most fascinating
thing I'm finding really.
I didn't set out to do that.
I just noticed that the
bridge has been forming now.
And so I've not really had
pharmaceutical companies
tell me, you can't say
this and all that thing.
Because I'm not
saying they're wrong.
I'm just saying you
can do this as well.
But you're clearly
pioneering, to step
out of this kind of work and
to say bye, bye to some money.
It's a challenge that a
lot of people are facing.
Yeah.
I think I was the
first scientist
in the pharmaceutical
industry in the UK
ever to leave to talk
about the placebo effect
and the power of the mind.
In a sense, I feel
like a walking a path.
But I love it.
Because it's my passion.
I can't think of
anything else I'd
rather do in my life is talk
about the power of the mind.
And one of the things I
talk about a lot as well
is if we cultivate a sense
of compassion and kindness
in our hearts and
minds, we also shape
the chemistry of the body.
Thinking compassion,
thinking kindness
actually dilates the arteries
and lowers blood pressure.
And I talk about this
kind of stuff a lot
and how kindness and compassion
is actually physically
beneficial to your heart.
Where I grew up in the
village I grew up in,
the women used to say, if
you live from the heart,
it's good for the heart.
And it's funny because now
we have the medical evidence
that if you live from the
heart, and I'm talking you know,
physically being kind and
compassionate, but also
in your head, just thinking
about people that you love
and thinking about
kindness and compassion,
because of the mind
body connection
you start to have this
cardio-protective-- it's
a word, protects your
cardiovascular system,
cardioprotective effect
that few people realize
but it applies to everyone.
And this is what I mean
by forming this bridge.
Because most people in
the mind spirit world
know this stuff or it
make sense to them.
But all these people out
here in the mainstream
could really benefit
from this stuff.
But they've just never heard it
because to them, all this stuff
over here is woo-woo.
So when I bridge the
gap with the science,
it like whoa, that's
really interesting.
So I find a lot
of my stuff is now
getting written up in
mainstream newspapers in the UK.
I was interviewed with a
big mainstream newspaper
just other day there and all the
mainstream magazines in the UK
are featured articles
now on this stuff,
which was 10 years ago, no
chance, absolutely no chance.
And it is happening.
I really see it as I'm
traveling throughout Europe
and as we're having
all those conversations
that things are evolving.
And we need to more
of these evidence.
So how do you explain
it scientifically?
What do you suggest
to people or is
there are some things that you
want to tell us about the brain
or about in the emanation of the
heart or some things that show?
Because we know it.
A lot of us know it intuitively.
We just don't know
how to explain it.
And sometimes we find ourselves
a bit short in conversations,
like but I just know.
I'm not scientific, but I know.
So thank you for doing the
work that you're doing.
Because you're giving
us clues and information
that are useful.
What I often do is just
quote a piece of research.
So for example, if I'm
suggesting to people that what
they visualize can have a
physical impact in the body,
now to the mainstream, that
would sound preposterous.
How can I visualize
myself and change my body?
Well, here's one part of
many parts of evidence.
Harvard University did
this fantastic study
where they asked volunteers
to play a simple combination
of piano notes.
So they literally sat
in front of a piano
and went plunk, plunk,
plunk, plunk repetitively
for two hours, just five
finger muscle combination,
repetitively for two hours
on five consecutive days,
so Monday through Friday.
And they had their
brain imaged every day.
And what the scientists
found is that the area
of the brain connected
to their finger muscles
began to grow like a muscle.
And by the fifth day, it
was substantially larger
than it was on the Monday.
And that's the term
known as neuroplasticity.
But where it gets really
interesting is a separate group
of volunteers, instead
of physical playing
the piano notes, plunk,
plunk, plunk, plunk,
they had to do in their heads.
So they had to just with,
without moving their muscles,
they had to imagine going plunk,
plunk, plunk, plunk, plunk,
plunk, repetitively,
for the same two hours
for the same five consecutive
days, Monday through Friday.
And they had their
brain imaged every day.
And incredibly,
their brain began
to grow like a muscle
in the area connected
to the finger muscles.
And if you compared on the
Friday, the brain images
for those who physically
played the notes with those who
imagined playing the notes, put
the slides beside each other,
you couldn't tell
the difference.
So in other words,
the brain was not
distinguishing between
who actually played piano
and who was imagining it.
So that's a very, very
powerful piece of evidence
that shows that
we have physically
shaped the structure of the
brain by imagining something.
And if we can do that,
what else can we do?
If we can physically
change-- I mean,
to change brain
structure, you're
talking the creation
of hundreds of billions
of neural connections.
And a neural connection is
like, if you take two trees
and hold the roots together,
opposite each other
and imagine the roots were
growing towards each other,
you're talking
hundreds of billions
of brand new roots being created
seemingly out of thin air,
but not really.
There's a little domino
effect from the impact
of your imagining on your genes.
At the genetic level, there's a
whole domino effect that starts
to construct these connections.
But this is occurring because
of something you're imagining,
not something you're doing.
So when I present that
kind of evidence to people
and it's published in a top
level mainstream journal,
it's hard to then have any
argument against that the mind
has this effect on.
The body
What part of the
brain actually?
How do you see it?
How can you see that's it's
growing, it's connecting?
There are several brain
imaging techniques.
In this piano study,
they used a technique
called transcranial
magnetic stimulation.
Most people have
heard of MRI and PET.
TMS, transcranial
magnetic stimulation,
is just a way of imaging
the brain by fighting bolts
of magnetic pulses
into it and you can get
a picture of what's going on.
And what they find is the area
of the brain begins to grow,
but it's the area connected
to the finger muscles
because you're imagining
your finger muscles growing.
Which area of the brain?
How do you know?
It's right across here.
It's called the motor cortex.
It runs right across the
top of the head here.
And actually it's shaped --
it's called the homunculus.
A homunculus is like a
reflexology maps, right?
You look at a reflexology
map of the foot
and you see there's
a bit for the liver,
the kidneys, and all that.
Well, in the brain it's
referred to as a homunculus.
So it's like the whole body part
is compressed into the strip.
And so there's a different
part for your little finger.
There's a different
part for you big toe.
There's a part for your ear,
your nose, your buttock.
Up So when you
place your attention
on any part of
the body, in fact,
this was done at the
Karolinska Institute
in Sweden, which is one of
the most famous institutes
in the world because
Nobel Prize winners give
Nobel lectures there in
medicine and physiology.
And they found that if you
just put your attention
on your tongue or on your finger
or another part of your body,
you activate selectively the
part of the reflexology map
or homunculus as it's
known in the brain,
you specifically activate that
part and not the other parts,
just where your
attention is focused.
And in the mind body
spirit field for years,
people have said energy
flows where attention goes.
Well, in a real
neurological sense,
we now have the evidence that
if you place your attention,
there is certainly activation
in the brain and a current
of electricity that
stimulates the specific area,
even if it's the
tip of your finger.
So when the people
did the piano study
they found that the
specific finger muscles,
those specific parts of the
brain and everywhere else,
just those parts began
to grow like a muscle.
This is fascinating.
I love hearing those.
So one of the questions that
now runs through my mind
is that a lot of
scientific00 or we
hear a lot to talk about
our left and right brain.
So this is actually helping
also to bridge both sides
because we're learning more
and more that it's important
that those are more balanced.
And it wasn't the case before.
We used to only function mainly
through the analytical mind,
but we're hearing more
and more that it's
important to incorporate
the emotional side as well.
Absolutely.
And then the more we allow
ourselves to feel our emotions
and express our
emotions-- I'm sitting
here in a hotel in Scotland.
And when I grew up in
Scotland, showing your emotions
was not a big thing.
So I personally grew up-- I
worked as a scientist for years
in the lab and I
still had difficulty
showing emotion because it's
embarrassing, for men like me.
It's embarrassing
according to our culture
so I would never do it.
And it has taken me a
decade since leaving
the pharmaceutical industry.
And now I've gotten so
far to the other side,
that I watch anything that's
slightly emotional on TV
and I'm weeping all over.
My partner looks right at
me and goes, tsk, tsk, tsk.
I could be watching--
there's an Australian soap
called "Neighbors" that
I watch every other day.
And I cry at
"Neighbors," even things
that nobody else is crying at.
And I think it's a consequence
of me using my creative side.
Because in the lab it
was just analytical, just
left brain the whole time.
And as I left there and
started to research other stuff
and visualize stuff,
the more you visualize,
you start to use
the right brain.
And what's begun
to happen is it's
allowed me to express and feel
emotion in a much deeper way
than ever before.
But what it also
does is, because I'm
using the left and the right,
analytical and the imaginative,
the creativity part
of it, it integrates
both hemispheres together.
And we end up with far more
brain capacity, brainpower,
much clearer, sharper in your
mind than ever I was before.
I thought I was
really bright, really
clever when I was a scientist.
But I'm light years beyond
where I was a decade ago.
A lot of scientific are right
now stuck in their equations
and in papers that are there.
And from a lot of interviews
that I'm doing a lot of people
speak about stepping
in the unknown
and there is some scientists
that have stepped in there.
It's called quantum
physics, I guess, small more
in that field, where
you just go into a much
larger scope of life.
And it seems like this
is where it's heading.
Now, you speak of
quantum entanglement
and all kinds of things now.
So it's backed up
by this new science.
Absolutely.
This is so fascinating.
See if you were to look
inside any part of your body.
So I could look inside
my hand, and if you
look inside your
hand, you get cells.
But look inside my
cells, you find your DNA,
proteins, enzymes, hormones.
And you look inside
them, and you
find they're made of atoms,
carbons, hydrogens, oxygen,
nitrogen, sulfur, phosphorus.
You look inside an atom
and there's nothing there.
Almost nothing.
You have protons, neutrons, and
electrons croutons and morons.
No, you don't.
[LAUGHING]
No, you don't really
have croutons and morons.
But there should be croutons,
because the Large Hadron
Collider in Switzerland has
been smashing particles together
and all the fragments
that come out of it
are known as a quantum soup.
So I think there should be
croutons, just not name it yet.
But anyway, protons,
neutrons, and electrons.
And what's amazing, is
inside an atom there is
99.9999999999999% empty space.
That's 13 nines percent
empty space inside an atom.
If a proton was the
size of a grape,
like a grape that
you make wine out of,
if a proton was the
size of a grape,
the closest electron would be
the size of a particle of dust.
And it would be
approximately two miles away.
So think for the moment how
far two miles is from her.
And imagine I have a grape in
my hand and that's a proton.
The closest electron
is two miles away
and it's now buzzing around.
And that's a reality inside
every atom in the body.
And there are
countless, trillions,
trillions and trillions
and godzillions
of atoms inside the body.
But one of the
interest phenomena
that you begin to observe when
you get to the quantum level.
In fact, you look
inside a proton
and there's three quarks, two
up quarks and a down quark.
And when you get to
this kind of level,
you find that all of the
particles are interconnected.
And scientist call
that entanglement.
And most cosmologists
would now agree
that the birth of the
universe, every particle
was connected at one point.
So therefore on some
level, the entire universe
is now entangled.
And what that means is that
the particles, the protons
inside your body right now are
connected to protons in a leaf
on a tree in the
Amazon rainforest,
which are connected to electrons
in the outermost portions
of a distant galaxy
a trillion trillion
billion light years from here.
And everything's interconnected.
What's really interesting
is on some level,
you have types of
particles called fermions
and no two fermions
can be the same state.
So on one level,
as you just think,
as you think, and you
shape you brain chemistry,
that changes the temperature
of the atoms in the vicinity.
And what that does is it
puts certain particles
into a particular state.
But what this means if no
two particles of this type
can be in the same state.
It means on some level
the entire universe
has to agree with what
you're thinking about.
The entire universe must know
on some weird level what you're
doing, otherwise
there's a possibility
that another particle
can be the same state.
But that's not allowed by
the rules of quantum physics.
So on some level the
entire universe must know,
it must be somehow
aware of everything
that's going on right now.
Which then brings us to the
cause and effect, which means
that every time we
change a decision,
it has an effect on the
future and on others
lives, our planet.
Absolutely.
In fact, one of the
challenges mainstream
physicists often present when
people in the spiritual mind
body spirit field talk
about entanglement,
physicists use the argument
that you can't exactly
send a message from one
particle to another, like a text
message kind of thing.
But what we're
beginning to understand
is if you go even
deeper, there's
a growing body of
scientists, including
myself, who would suggest
that the universe isn't inept.
It's not dead.
It's not random fluctuations
in the quantum field
that create the
quarks, but perhaps
at the deepest fabric of reality
itself, the universe is alive.
And as preposterous as that may
sound to mainstream, by making
that assumption is
one of the only ways
you can start to understand some
of the experiments that show
that if one person--
take a couple who
share a strong emotional
bond, typical experiment.
And you put you separate
them by a distance.
Put one inside an MRI scanner,
the other down the corridor.
And you flash a light in
the eyes of the one down
the corridor, but because
they're emotionally connected,
what you find in
the MRI it picks up
a flash in the visual
cortex-- that's
the area that processes visual
information --in their partner.
So one person saw something,
but their partner's brain
thought they saw it.
And this is separated
by a distance.
And the only way you can
account for that is by the idea
that your consciousness
isn't inside your head.
It's not produced
by brain chemistry,
which is the mainstream view.
And you start to then
arrive at a conclusion.
The only logical
conclusion is maybe
consciousness is something more
fundamental to reality itself.
And if you take
that assumption, it
means there's consciousness
in everything, even
in a blade of grass,
even a leaf on a tree
and a piece of bark on a
tree, even a piece of stone
that you walk on.
I'm not suggesting it's
self aware consciousness.
I mean my table at home doesn't
sit up late at night to watch
"Star Trek" with excitement.
But there must be like a
background hum of consciousness
in every single thing.
You probably require a neural
net in the brain to have
of our type of consciousness.
But it doesn't include a
consciousness in everything.
And so when you start
to look into the deepest
fabric of reality, you start
to arrive at the conclusion
that perhaps it's
alive and therefore
everything is interconnected.
And this idea that
you can't send
a text message, maybe
that only relates
to protons and electrons.
But when you go Even deeper to
basic fabric of reality, then
perhaps we're
constantly exchanging
information, conscious
transformation,
with the entire universe.
And I really believe
that happens.
And these types
of MRI experiments
are beginning to
suggest that that might
really be how things work.
So as we are
thinking, as we are
living, as we are having
thousands of thoughts,
we're also impacting.
We don't need to speak,
just our own presence
be enough to shift things?
Yeah.
You know, I often say to
people that if you just
think a thought of
kindness, it send a ripple
out from you that never stops.
Because the universe
is infinite.
Every scientist agrees
the universe is infinite.
So therefore, even just
the thought of kindness,
and I'm choosing
kindness on purpose
because I have this
idea, and many people
share the same idea, that
a small group of people
with compassion and
kindness in their hearts
can change the world.
And I think it starts up here.
You just think
kindness, think love
think of someone you cared about
it and it sends a little wave.
It's like dropping
a pebble in a pond.
Plop.
And little waves and at
the other side of the pond,
a lily pad does that.
And it's got no idea
why it's doing that,
but the reason it's
doing that is because you
dropped the pebble in the pond.
So that's the metaphor I guess.
And the pebble in the
pond is a single thought
of kindness and
love and compassion
that sends these ripples that
go on for infinity, infinity.
So you start to feel
more empowered then.
You start to understand that
maybe I can impact the world.
And it really just
starts in my own mind.
And it's doing away with this
idea that we're powerless
and replacing it with this
idea of being powerful.
And that our thoughts
really carry.
They're not floaty, inert things
that disappear into the ether,
but they always
have consequences.
So therefore, you're led to
the inevitable conclusion
that if I'm so powerful it
matters what I think about.
So therefore if you want to
make the world a better place,
then start it in your mind more
with ideas of gratitude, ideas
of compassion and kindness and
think of people in the best
possible sense, instead of
dwelling on the stuff that's
annoying, dwelling on the people
that we don't get on with,
dwelling on stressful
thing, dwelling on what's
not working in our lives.
And start to focus on
the magic, on the beauty,
on the specialness of life.
And you send this
ripple out that it does
eventually impact the world.
Because if many of us
think the same way,
then the world can only change.
Because we want to see
immediate results too.
I mean this is part
of our society.
We want to see right now.
So those thoughts
unfortunately, we
don't know immediately the
impact that it will have,
even if we meditate
10 minutes a day
or if we have
these good thoughts
and make those
declaration or intentions,
sometimes you don't see it
right away and we give up.
Yeah.
It's so common to give
up because we're looking
for these immediate results.
So if you're thinking doesn't
have an immediate result,
not only do we give
up, but we start
to feel that I have no power.
We start to feel, surely I've
been thinking of that thing
and nothing's happened.
I haven't changed the
world with a single thought
so I must not be good at this.
And we disempower ourselves.
But if we can replace that need
for immediacy with the idea
that there's a bit a lag time.
It's like if a
person is painting
watercolor, to create an image
you have to do several washes.
So you wash over another
wash, another wash,
and gradually the image gets
darker and darker and darker,
until it's really real.
And I think to use that kind
of metaphor, that to begin
to shape life in
a significant way,
we have to repeat
the same thought.
It' like the piano study
the neuroplasticity study
in the brain, we didn't
shape brain circuits
by just imagining playing
the piano notes once.
We had to do the same
thing repetitively.
So maybe if we
understand that sometimes
things will shift
with just one idea.
But many times for
the average person
it takes thinking the
same thing several times.
And that begins to build
patience because if we
understand that's
probably how it works,
then we stop looking
for immediate results.
When they come immediately,
whoa, it's a blessing.
But we don't need to
have immediate results.
So therefore we maintain
the sense of being powerful.
You used to coach athletes?
Do you still do it.
I don't formally anymore.
I give pieces of advice, yeah.
But while I worked
as a scientist,
I was an athletics coach, I
coached long jump, triple jump.
It's interesting, the
power of visualization,
they use it a lot.
Athletes do have coaches.
And I spoke-- and a friend
of mine is Lewis Pugh.
So he's a British athlete
and mentalist that
swim across the North Pole.
And he said, 2/3 of my work
has been visualizing the cold
of the water and going
through until he was ready
and then just being in the
water, he was prepared.
Yeah absolutely.
When I was an
athletics coach, you
start to understand that the
top athletes in the world, they
all use visualization.
In fact, Usain Bolt, when
he broke the 100 meters
world record a few
years ago, he ran 9.58.
I mean, a preposterously fast
time, awesomely fast time.
And he was quoted at
the end as saying,
I just visualized
and then run my race.
And that's just a fragment of
the volume of virtualization
that athletes actually do.
Because of athlete visualize
themselves like swimming,
for your friend for example,
then the brain processes
as if it's actually happening.
So if he's imagining
swimming in really,
really cold, then the brain
is processing it as if he can
swim in really, really cool.
So the brain begins to
alter it's chemistry,
alter the biological
processes in the body that
allow him to swim in the cold.
And for an athlete who's jumping
or hurdling or sprinting,
then the conditions in which
they imagine themselves
performing, the brain begins
to alter the chemical processes
in the body so that the
body is able to do the thing
that your imagine it doing.
What a beautiful machine.
Yeah, a beautiful
machine that we are.
Yeah. we're far more
than we think we are.
The impossible seems possible.
I think we're capable of
so much more than we think.
I never cease to be
amazed at the capacity
people have to
heal their bodies,
perform great feats of
strength and endurance
or to shape the
circumstances of our life,
even when they've been in
really challenging situations.
It's important to talk
also in this conversation
about negative feelings or
about belief system that
are stuck in the subconscious.
Now it's a big part
of how we react.
We react automatically
to things.
So if even though if we may
say a positive affirmation,
we might not be aligned with it.
What's your advice?
I work on beliefs
quite a lot for myself.
We might think, I want
to get over there.
But a little belief,
a little voice,
that we perhaps
might have picked up
when we were younger,
children for example,
or even another
part of our lives,
that I'm not good enough.
I don't deserve that.
And I'm speaking from
personal experience here.
And I think many of the viewers
can probably relate to this.
But I grew up in a small
village in central Scotland
and the idea that we
are important isn't
something that you get
in that small village
in central Scotland.
In fact, you get the idea--
it's a small places and poverty
is a big thing in the
village I grew up in.
So people develop this idea that
not only are they not powerful,
but they're not import.
So I grew up in
that environment.
So when I started to
get on in my life,
it was so frustrating
because I had these beliefs,
I can do things.
And I knew that I
could explain stuff.
And I was a good
athlete and all that.
But this little voice kept
coming up and saying, ah,
but you're not good enough.
You don't deserve that.
You're rubbish.
Who are you to think
that you could speak
at the Hay House Conference?
this weekend?
Who are you to think you
deserve to be on that stage?
And that little voice, still
to this day, still to this day,
that little voice comes up.
And I think a lot
of public speakers,
even though we don't write
about it, we all share
the same-- we all have
our own little stuff.
And that little voice
comes up from time to time.
Who are you?
You don't deserve this.
And I have to work with that.
I've worked with it
a lot and the voice
has got quieter and quieter.
And it's belief work.
So I would write down on a
piece of paper how I'm feeling.
Why do I feel this way?
And I'd start to question
who I feel myself to be
and why do I believe
this about myself.
And eventually uncover
some ideas about myself.
And I replaced the
negative beliefs,
the disempowering little
voices, you're not good enough.
Who are you to be standing
on the stage for example.
You don't deserve this.
I replace it with
positive affirmations.
Or you're not to.
Yeah.
I deserve these things.
One of the things
I've said a lot is I
live each day with
happiness and joy,
trusting only good
things come to me.
And I've used affirmations like,
I am a spark of the divine.
I am part of everything
that has ever been
and I absolutely deserve to
live a life of happiness and joy
and have anything that I
choose to create in my life.
Things like that.
And if you say them
over and over again,
the brain begins to process it
as if it's actually happening.
And we move towards what
we say about ourselves.
And the disempowering
beliefs work in the same way.
The little voice that comes
up all the time in our lives,
that we don't notice
it coming out,
but it's impacting the brain.
It's impacting the body.
And what it's doing is we're
moving towards that reality.
So when you identify
it, it empowers
you to realize that doesn't
need to have that power.
Then you replace it
with something positive.
So I've often had to do that.
And it's not like, I think
many people do belief work,
we think I've done it once.
And then things
worked for a while.
And then it seems an
issue comes back again.
People think, I must
have done it wrong.
I'm back in the same place.
But that's not the case.
Because life is cyclic.
There's a science
called chronobiology.
I have written about
it in my new book
and it's in the
film "Choice Point."
I am in that film.
And basically it shows
how cycles in the cosmos.
like the Earth spins.
As the Earth spins, the
sun goes across the sky.
But that impacts
of biochemistry,
impacts a little
mechanism that produces
the hormone melatonin
that causes us to sleep
and wake and sleep and wake.
So you find many
biological processes
are driven by cosmic cycles.
So by definition, life will
flow in cyclic patterns.
So life will repeat itself.
Society, you see rises and
falls of civilizations,
political swings, everything
in life and human experience
is cyclic.
So when we come back to the
same place and we think,
I thought I dealt
with this belief.
I can't believe I'm
in the same place.
You're not.
It's just as the cycles
came around again,
you've met as a higher
version of yourself.
It's not that you failed.
It's not that you failed before.
And this is why I
say, I have dealt
with this little voice that
says you're not good enough.
You're not good enough to
be standing on that stage.
Here we are again.
And I no longer give
myself a hard time and say,
I must have done it
wrong, because I didn't.
It's just the cycles
came along again.
I'm now a higher
version of myself.
Because I'm speaking-- I'm
right after Wayne Dyer at the I
Can Do It conference.
And that little voice is
coming up and saying, how can
you hope to follow Wayne Dyer?
You know, it's that little fear.
You're just a little wee
guy from that little village
in Scotland.
How do you deserve have
to be with these, speaking
with Louise Hay and Wayne
Dyer and Anita Moorjani
and Robert Holden and all that.
And I dealt with
that kind of belief.
But it's just I'm a higher
version of myself now.
It doesn't have the same power.
But I have to
continually-- everyone,
we always have to
continually adapt.
As the world changes, so
we have to change as well.
It's not that you failed,
it's just get that you're
a higher version of yourself.
So inevitably the cycle
will come around again,
giving us an invitation to
rise to the next highest
levels of ourselves.
And so when we encounter
those does difficulties
or those deja vus or this
situation, we say to ourselves,
no thank you.
-I can do it.
I'm just going to do it anyway.
I often say to myself
when fears come up,
well, I'm just going
to do it anyway.
Susan Jeffers still has that
philosophy, feel the fear
and do it anyway.
My similar thing is
well, I'm just going
to do it anyway regardless.
And the fears will come up, but
I'm just going to do it anyway.
And there's those cycles too
where life is just quieter
and then we need to be
peaceful instead of go,
go go and creating chaos,
maybe by this go, go go.
It's good to just relax.
It's OK.
It's part of life, the
cycles go like this as well.
It is part of life and you'll
notice that because sometimes
in life, there
are many obstacles
and things just seem
to be slowing down.
And maybe that's the world,
the cycles, the universe,
your own consciousness,
whatever, saying, maybe this is
an opportunity just to relax.
Maybe I'm not supposed to be
running all over the place.
Maybe this is a period
of time that coming,
a cycle, that's
saying, just chill out.
And maybe within the chilling
out, and the relaxing,
I will find something very
special about myself that
is important for me to become
the next version of myself,
to become me in the
future for other things
that are maybe perhaps
destined or they
have a high level
high likelihood
of occurring in my future.
Maybe this period of time
is necessary to shape me
into the person I need to
become so that I can meet
that in the best possible way.
And get the outcome that is
actually perhaps best for me
or predestined.
So I need this period of quiet.
And it's OK and having loving
thoughts during that time is
the most important, being
in the present moment,
enjoying things, viewing
them positively, reaffirming.
Yeah.
I think one of the most powerful
ways of being in the moment
and not running about
all over the place
is, I think there's a natural
flow of love and compassion
and wellness.
I've written about this
as well, that there's
a wind behind evolution.
And the wind is
compassion and kindness.
The wind is love.
And many mainstream scientists
might have a problem with that.
But I think I've
justified in the contents
of what I've written about.
But I think there's an
evolution in the wind.
And it's consciousness.
It's the evolution
of consciousness
that's driving
the whole program,
the whole genetic thing
that we go through.
And I think, when we have a
period of quiet in our lives,
we can just tap into that.
It's almost like paddling
your boat into the current.
And how do we paddle into
that natural current?
We be kind.
And that means in your
physical expression in life
but also in your
head and your mind.
So think of people
in the best way.
Forgiveness, if it's possible.
Exercising gentleness and
compassion with people,
demonstrating empathy.
Just thinking of
people you love.
Gratitude.
All of these things that
the spiritual teachers
have been saying forever.
If we do these things in
the quite times in our life,
then we're almost
getting into the flow,
so we then move in the
direction the nature
wants to take us in
anyway without any effort
on our own front.
And then the things that
are ultimately best for us
will present themselves to us.
Because we're not trying
to make anything happen.
We're not resisting anything.
We're actually just being
love, compassion, and kindness.
So therefore, what
presents itself to
us is actually what's supposed
to present itself to us.
As simple as that.
The answer is simple.
It's not always.
Yeah.
I don't want to come
across as saying,
it's just as simple as that.
Because as everyone's different.
We all have our
own-- there isn't
always a one size fits all.
But this general
principle, if we
can hold this general principle
in our hearts and minds,
then when the uniqueness of
our own life presents us,
then it will not be exactly the
same as someone else's life.
But if we meet it with
these ideals in our minds,
then we will find a way to
navigate through the challenges
of our lives.
Beautiful.
Well thank you for this
very juicy, inspiring
conversation, David.
Thank you so much.
It's been my pleasure.
Is it finished?
I'm so enjoying this.
I could go on for
another two hours.
Yeah, well, we'll save a little
bit of energy for tomorrow.
Because this is your big day.
I wish you a lot of fun.
I'll be there to watch
it at the conference.
And what a great moment.
Thank you very much.
I'm so happy.
Much, much love, my
delicious co-creators.
And we are actually here
if you're wondering,
we're at the
citizenM in Glasgow,
in the city center of Glasgow.
It's a fun little hotel.
I'm actually staying here
while here in the city.
And it's part of those
kind of experience also
that induce the beauty
and the creativity
that some people can have.
You should see the rooms
and everything is built
so that there's this harmony.
And it feels good.
And you can relax.
Sometimes we don't give
ourselves those gifts
and now there's this whole
new generation now thinking
differently and
bringing this really
ethical business out and
those wonderful things out
into the world.
So it's exciting
that I can report
on another magnificent
story with you.
Thank you.
Thank you very much.
Much much love.
Bye, bye.